CharacteristicsOfCanon and SimpleBlockX4 (#2)
svalinn/model_development_workflow: ErrorBlocks.md

This step is unnecessary unless you want to explore the model in Solidworks or learn how to save file as .sat. To skip this step download the ACIS file titled "ErrorBlocks.sat" and open as described in ANSYS section._
  1. Download the part titled "ErrorBlocks.sw" from this page and open in Solidworks.
  2. Export the assembly/part to ACIS format (.sat file extension)
     * ACIS format 22 is preferred (default for Solidworks)
     * Note that multiple file types could be used, but there is anecdotal evidence that suggests .sat files work the best for    this process. Otherwise formats such as STEP and STL are also able to be imported to Trelis/Cubit.
     * Use save or export feature and select ACIS (.sat) format

### In ANSYS SpaceClaim
_SpaceClaim is useful for cleaning models that have small gaps, overlaps, edge contacts, and unnecessary geometric detail. For all of these edits one must work closely with the creator of the model/experiment to determine which
complications are important to the end result and which are able to be changed. More general SpaceClaim tutorials/support can be found_ [here](http://www.spaceclaim.com/en/Support/Tutorials/Essentials.aspx).

>   1. Open ErrorBlocks.sat by clicking file, open, and then sorting by .sat type files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. Open `ErrorBlocks.sat` by clicking file, open, and then sorting by .sat type files.
```

# Assembly of Blocks with Errors

#### Procedure Overview

  1. Save [ErrorBlocks.SLDASM](ErrorBlocks.SLDASM) and convert to ACIS format or directly save and open [ErrorBlocks.SAT](ErrorBlocks.SAT).
  2. Fix mistakes within the model using ANSYS SpaceClaim.
  3. Import file into Trelis/Cubit and inspect model for any import issues.
  4. Create the graveyard volume (void optional for understanding).
  5. Finish part in Cubit/Trelis.
     * Imprint and Merge volumes
     * Assign materials
     * Export file to .h5m

#### Goals of Example

  * Execute the workflow with a model that has geometric issues to be resolved in SpaceClaim.

>   * Work through important processes on an example that is easy to visualize and understand.

Reviewer 2: What is the "important process" - do you mean "import" or "imprint"? Or by "important" do you mean the standard and basic necessary processes?

>   * Provide a general understanding of what issues could arise on more complex models.

Reviewer 2: It would probably make sense to put this before the procedure overview

## Procedure

### In Initial CAD program

_Any CAD engine should work for this process as long as it can export to a format importable by SpaceClaim or Cubit/Trelis._

>   1. Download the part titled "ErrorBlocks.sw" from this page and open in Solidworks.

Reviewer 2: "ErrorBlocks.sw" link to a file rather than stating it's on this page (can be hard for people to find otherwise).

>   1. Download the part titled "ErrorBlocks.sw" from this page and open in Solidworks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  1. Download the part titled `ErrorBlocks.sw` from this page and open in Solidworks.

```

  2. Export the assembly/part to ACIS format (.sat file extension)
     * ACIS format 22 is preferred (default for Solidworks)

>      * Use save or export feature and select ACIS (.sat) format

Reviewer 2: You may want to include more detail about how to actually open/import and export files in Solidworks like you do in the next section with SpaceClaim.

> ![ErrorBlocksOverviewWide](https://github.com/NybergWISC/model_development_workflow/blob/master/PicturesSnapshots/ErrorBlocks/ErrorBlocksOverviewWide.JPG)

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a caption or note that this image shows what the model should look like.

<details><summary> Notes </summary><p>
- The preferred format is ACIS (.sat). Note that multiple file types could be used, but there is anecdotal evidence that suggests .sat files work the best for this process. Otherwise formats such as STEP and STL are also able to be imported to Trelis/Cubit.
<br/>

> - This step is unnecessary unless you want to explore the model in Solidworks or learn how to save file as .sat.

Reviewer 2: Does "This step" refer to the whole section labeled "In Initial CAD Program" or just step 1 or step 2? Be more specific.

  <br/><br/>
  Overlaps: when particles encounter overlaps between two volumes they may not be able to determine which volume they are in and be lost. There is one volume that is obviously overlapping with other volumes.
  <br/><br/>
  Edge contacts: there is a possibility that when two volumes are only in contact on a single edge it can cause an issue with surface definitions. There is one example of an edge contact in this model.
  <br/><br/>
  Unnecessary Detail: all details in the CAD model are included in the meshing process and in the final analysis and small details can greatly increase the amount of computation necessary. The physical threads included in this model are one example. This issue is a problem of optimization and depends on the computing power available as well as the level of detail necessary.
  </p></details>

> <br/>

Reviewer 2: This section might make sense to put before the "how to find them" section. That way, people have an understanding of the types of features they are looking for and why.

Reviewer 2: Also, is there are reason this is collapsed by default (same with all the Notes sections)? That might make it easy for someone to miss if they don't realize they should be clicking it.

Reviewer 2: Actually moving this description to the start of this section in the description could be helpful to let people know they will be learning how to identify and fix these common issues.

<details><p><summary>Notes</summary>
- Most often in real models unnecessary details must be determined intuitively and visually while overlaps, edge contacts, and small gaps cannot be found visually.
<br/></br>
- For all of these edits one must work closely with the creator of the model/experiment to determine which complications are important to the end result and which are able to be changed.
</p></details>

### In Cubit/Trelis
_Cubit and Trelis are basically the same CAD software with Trelis being the commercial version. They are most useful for the meshing of geometries and assigning materials to volumes._

> | Steps  | Graphic User Interface  | In Command Line  |

Reviewer 2: I would make a note above this table that the procedure is described for both the GUI and command line, but a user only needs to do each step in one or the other, not both.

|---|---|---|

> | __Import the .sat file into Trelis/Cubit__  | - Can be imported using the GUI with __File -> Import__. <br/></br> - Select the file through file explorer and open. <br/></br> - One important qualifier to include is `[attributes_on]`. | - In the command line the simple form of the command is `import acis [filepath]` <br/></br> - This command can be appended with further commands that can be found by typing `help import acis`. <br/></br> - These qualifiers correspond with the options given when importing files through the GUI. <br/></br> - One important qualifier to include is `[attributes_on]`.  |

Reviewer 2: Is the `[attributes on]` qualifier something that gets checked before saying "open"? where/how does one select this qualifier?

> | __How to save progress for the file as ACIS__  | - Click on file, export, and select the file destination and name. <br/></br> - Make sure that it is being exported as ACIS (.sat) and press ok to save.  | - In command line type `export acis [filepath] overwrite`.  |

Reviewer 2: Suggestion for formatting consistency (check for consistency on this in other locations too).
```suggestion
| __How to save progress for the file as ACIS__  | - Click on __File -> Export__ and select the file destination and name. <br/></br> - Make sure that it is being exported as ACIS (.sat) and press ok to save.  | - In command line type `export acis [filepath] overwrite`.  |

```

> | __Make sure units/distances are correct and if not, fix them__  | - A distance within the model of "X units" should have a metric distance of "X centimeters". <br/></br> - To check this click on a surface/line with a known metric value and then navigate to the properties page and check the surface area or curve length. <br/></br> - On the Command Panel click on __Geometry (leftmost option) -> Volume -> Transform -> Scale (from dropdown menu) -> Enter Scale Factor -> Apply__ | - A distance within the model of "X units" should have a metric distance of "X centimeters". <br/></br> - To check this in the command line the general form is `list [entity name and number] geom`. For example to check the geometry of volume 1 enter `list Volume 1 geom`. <br/></br> - In command line enter `vol all scale [Scale Factor]`. For example parts from solidworks would require `vol all scale 0.1` to convert the units to centimeters. |

Reviewer 2: `To check this click on a surface/line with a known metric value and then navigate to the properties page` --> Where is the properties page?

> | __Make sure units/distances are correct and if not, fix them__  | - A distance within the model of "X units" should have a metric distance of "X centimeters". <br/></br> - To check this click on a surface/line with a known metric value and then navigate to the properties page and check the surface area or curve length. <br/></br> - On the Command Panel click on __Geometry (leftmost option) -> Volume -> Transform -> Scale (from dropdown menu) -> Enter Scale Factor -> Apply__ | - A distance within the model of "X units" should have a metric distance of "X centimeters". <br/></br> - To check this in the command line the general form is `list [entity name and number] geom`. For example to check the geometry of volume 1 enter `list Volume 1 geom`. <br/></br> - In command line enter `vol all scale [Scale Factor]`. For example parts from solidworks would require `vol all scale 0.1` to convert the units to centimeters. |

Reviewer 2: "`vol all scale 0.1` to convert the units to centimeters" doesn't necessarily convert to cm does it? Rather this literally scales it to one tenth the original size. The way this reads right now might lead someone to believe that regardless of their starting scaling, if they use 0.1, it will automatically go to cm scaling, which is not necessarily correct because it all depends on the size of the model when it is imported.

| __Inspect models and resolve overlapping volumes__ | - On the Command Panel click on __Geometry (leftmost option) -> Volume -> Modify -> Heal (from dropdown menu) -> check Autoheal -> Apply__ <br/></br> - There are many options within the modify dropdown menu, but none are as robust as SpaceClaim|- In command line one can fix overlaps by typing `validate vol all` and then `healer autoheal [problem vols]`. <br/></br> - This should work to detect overlaps, but is not as robust as SpaceClaim. |

> <details><p><summary>Notes</summary>

Reviewer 2: Why is this section in a drop down section in notes? It is another part of the necessary procedure so it should be it's own next step.

- A more general DAGMC based tutorial for Cubit/Trelis basics can be found at https://svalinn.github.io/DAGMC/usersguide/trelis_basics.html.
<br/></br>
- "Command Panel" and "Command Line" are necessary for GUI and command line methods respectively. To enable these select View and switch "Command Line" and/or "Command Panel" to visible.
<br/></br>
- Scale will most likely be off by a factor of 10. For example models from Solidworks will most likely be increased by 10x or 100cm to 1000 units, but this scaling changes based on the initial CAD program. You must scale every entity down or up by that factor to match units to cm.
</p></details>

#### Creation of Void/Vacuum Volume and Graveyard

> _A method (implicit compliment) is implemented automatically during a DAG-MCNP5 run that creates a void volume in all spaces without geometry. This means that while one could explicitly create void volumes, it is often not necessary._

Reviewer 2: The implicit complement can also be assigned a material but it doesn't need to be explicitly created in this case either. To assign a material to the implicit complement, you add the graveyard volume to a material group (so the graveyard volume will belong to two groups `mat:Graveyard` and `mat:<impl comp assignment>`). By default, the implicit complement is void if not assigned.

<br/></br>

> _The vacuum and graveyard volumes are not part of the model being analyzed, but play a role in the final analysis. When particles move freely through the vacuum volume and stop once they reach the graveyard volume._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_The vacuum and graveyard volumes are not part of the model being analyzed, but are necessary for the particle tracking algorithm. Particles move freely through the implicit complement and stop once they reach the graveyard volume which indicates they are leaving the geometry._

```

| Steps  | In Graphic User Interface  | In Command Line  |
|---|---|---|
| __Create a cube large enough to envelop all other volumes.__  | - Select __Geometry -> Volume -> Create__ and select __Brick__ from the drop down menu. <br/></br> - Type 500 in each dimension box __(width, height, depth)__ and press __Apply__ to create the block.  | - The general form is `create [shape] [dimensions based on shape]`. </br> - For a simple cube 500x500x500 you can enter `create brick x 500`.  |
| __Create another slightly larger cube to be used for graveyard.__  | - In command panel create another brick in the same way as part 1, using 750 as the new dimension in each dimension box.  | - Enter `create brick x 750`  |
| __Center volumes within the larger cubes.__  | To move the blocks in command panel select __Geometry -> Volume -> Transform__ and select __Move__ from the drop down menu. <br/></br> - Type "5 6" into the __Volume ID(s)__ box. Then __Select Method -> Distance__ and type 100 into the __X Distance__ box. _This distance/direction may vary._  | - General form is `move vol [volume ids] [axis] [distance along axis]` <br/></br> - Enter `move vol 5 6 x 100`.  |

> | __Hollow out large cubes to match functionality.__  | - Select __Geometry -> Volume -> Boolean__ and select __Subtract__ from the dropdown menu. <br/></br> - Select volume 6 as volume A and volume 5 as volume B. Check __Keep Originals__ and click __Apply__. <br/></br> - You can then delete volume 6 by selecting __Geometry -> Volume -> Delete__ and typing 6 into the __Volume ID(s)__ box and clicking apply. <br/></br> - Select __Geometry -> Volume -> Boolean__ and select __Subtract__ from the dropdown menu. Select volume 5 as volume A and volumes 1,2,3, and 4 as volume B. Again make sure to check __Keep Originals__ and click __Apply__. <br/></br> - Then use the delete action to delete volume 5.  | - Enter `subtract vol 5 from 6 keep` <br/></br> - Enter `delete vol 6` to get rid of the original large box. <br/></br> - Enter `subtract vol 1 2 3 4 from 5 keep` or `subtract vol 1 to 4 from 5 keep`. <br/></br> - Enter `delete vol 5`. |

Reviewer 2: I think there was a much simpler way to do this that was just the creation of a bounding box?

(Though the method described here is technically correct too, just more work)

<details><p><summary>Notes</summary>

> - These volumes could also be created in another CAD program and then assigned a material in the exact same way, but this is an example of how to create these volumes in Trelis and Cubit.

Reviewer 2: You say "these volumes" but really you are only referring to the graveyard volume, correct? Because the implicit complement is created automatically upon exporting and should never have to be defined explicitly.

<br/></br>

> - Most likely the volumes will be slightly off centered in the x direction, but the larger bricks will be centered with one another. This may vary based on the initial CAD program.

Reviewer 2: Why is this?

<br/></br>
- To see the blocks better you can select the wireframe option in the top toolbar. It is directly to the right of the undo arrow on the toolbar. Also you can click on the axis on the bottom left of the volume viewing area to get a straight on (x,y) view.
</p></details>

#### Imprinting and Merging Volumes in Cubit/Trelis

> _Imprinting and Merging surfaces accelerates the DAGMC process by combining surfaces._

Reviewer 2: This isn't just for DAGMC acceleration but is a required step so that components (surfaces) are not defined twice. Surfaces and volumes cannot overlap because it creates issues with particle tracking and not know which volume a particle is moving into when it crosses a surfaces. So to prevent this, coincident surfaces are imprinted (meaning they are flagged or identified as being coincident) and then merged (redefined as a single surface). There's a good visual representation on the DAGMC user website you might consider linking to as well.

  1. Imprint and Merge all shared surfaces in the model.
     * In command panel select __Geometry -> Volume -> Imprint Merge__ and select __Imprint and Merge__ from the dropdown menu. Then type "all" into the __Volume ID(s)__ box and click __Apply__.
     * In command line type `imprint volume all` and then enter. Then type `merge volume all`.
     * _Now all surfaces that previously overlapped have been merged into one surface shared by both volumes._

<details><p><summary>Notes</summary>
- The default tolerated distance for imprinting/merging surfaces is 5.0e-4 units.
<br/>

> - Combining surfaces cuts two surfaces and two sets of tetrahedron mesh areas down to one, decreasing computational power required as well as eliminating possible errors where particles exist simultaneously in two surfaces.

Reviewer 2: See note above, but it is primarily for the purpose of eliminating errors when doing particle tracking.

</p></details>

#### Assigning Materials in Cubit/Trelis
_Most commands for this section are best implemented through the command line. More general instructions can
be found_ [here](http://svalinn.github.io/DAGMC/usersguide/codes/dag-mcnp.html).

  1. The general command for assigning Materials/Densities in Cubit/Trelis

>   `group "mat:[assigned material number]/rho:[assigned density]" add

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  `group "mat:[assigned material number or name]/rho:[assigned density]" add

```

I think whether it is a number or name is code dependent or dependent on how your materials are being handled?

  vol [volume numbers]` where the density is in [atoms/barn-cm] for positive values and [g/cc] for negative values.

>   2. The blocks will be given two different materials and then the void and the graveyard volumes will be assigned. These material assignments will depend on the material library you create/use for the project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  2. The blocks will each be assigned a different material and then the implicit complement and the graveyard volumes will be assigned. These material assignments will depend on the material library you create/use for the project.

```

     * To assign one block to the first material use `group "mat:1/rho:0.0223" add vol 1`
     * To assign the rest of the blocks to the second material use `group "mat:2/rho:0.03" add vol 2 to 4`

>      * To assign the void volume to vacuum use `group "mat:Vacuum" add vol 5`

Reviewer 2: volume 5 was deleted above? Also, I think you mean "implicit complement" here, not the void volume. See my note at the beginning of this section about how to assign materials to the implicit complement.

     * Finally to assign the graveyard volume use `group "mat:Graveyard" add vol 6`

#### Exporting file to .h5m format

> _This plugin translates the CAD file to something that can be used by DAGMC. Instructions as to how to install this plugin can be found_ [here](https://svalinn.github.io/DAGMC/install/plugin.html).

Reviewer 2: Note, plugin has to be installed prior to opening and doing all this stuff in cubit/trelis. If someone gets through all the imprint/merge steps and finds they need to install the plugin, they will have to exit and re-open. This section on installing the plugin may be better to have as a first step before they even open the program.

Reviewer 2: (At least I think this is true, but maybe @gonuke can confirm/deny that behavior)

>   1. Once the plugin is correctly installed you should receive the message `Loaded Svalinn plugin`, line break, `DAGMC export command available` in the command line.

Reviewer 2: I don't think you need to specify the line break
